4.1
Math

Format filtering.
We started with a large but noisy problem set of around 700k samples. We
first perform comprehensive pre-processing and filtering of the data to ensure all the problems
are complete and that the final answers were accurate and verifiable with a rule-based system.
Particularly, we filter proof-based and multi-part problems for which it is difficult to verify
correctness. Furthermore, we reformulate multiple-choice problems into statement-based problems
for more robust verification and increased difficulty.

Difficulty filtering.
We implemented a two-stage filtering pipeline to curate a dataset of problems
at a ‘goldilocks’ difficulty level, neither too easy nor too hard for the model to learn from. First, we
performed an initial difficulty assessment using Mistral Large 2 [MistralAI, 2024], by sampling 16
solutions for each problem and removing the ones that are either never solved or solved with a high
success rate. This initial, curated set of problems was then used to train a 24B model via our online
RL pipeline, resulting in a small but capable checkpoint which we use solely for grading.

In the second stage, this stronger, RL-trained model was used to re-grade the entire original dataset.
We again sampled 16 responses for each problem, filtering out the easiest and the still-unsolved
problems. We then further filter out potentially incorrect problems where a majority of samples have
the same final answer but disagree with the “ground-truth” answer. This is because when the model
consistently reaches a consensus that contradicts the reference solution, the problems themselves are
more likely to have wrong ground-truth answers.

This two-stage methodology was crucial because a single pass with the initial, weaker Mistral Large 2
model would have been insufficient. Its reasoning capabilities would likely have caused it to discard
many genuinely difficult problems by incorrectly classifying them as unsolvable. By using a stronger,
RL-trained model for a second pass, we ensured that these valuable and challenging training examples
were accurately assessed and retained.

Table 1: Number of math training samples after different filtering stages.

Initial data
w/ Format filtering
w/ Difficulty filtering

699k
501k
38k